Dr. Williams, first of all, we'd like to begin with what you're working on right now.
I'm working on a novel called The Queen of the Legion.
There's another story about the Legion of Space, a series that started back in the early 30s.
Is it going to be serialized like the others?
Well, here's hoping the market started running certain Fred Polo gave me a contract for it a couple of years ago,
and I was president of the science fiction writers of America and involved in other things,
and it has taken time to do, but it's finally falling together, and I'm putting it into my new work process.
I'm pretty enthusiastic about it now. The main character is a girl, and at first I was sort of uncertain
whether I could be convincing in presenting a woman's point of view, but I've sort of fallen in love with Jill by now.
I think I know her pretty well and like her, and I hope the readers do.
Have you finished that trilogy with Fredric Polo, the one on the Dyson Sphere, the three volumes on that?
No, I'm sorry to say we haven't. I finished my part of the second volume some years ago, I think,
and a year and a half ago, Judy Lynn Del Ray gave us a revised contract with a larger advance,
and her idea then was to publish all three proposed volumes in one thick volume,
and Fred was going to get it out last March at that time, but that's the last I've heard about it.
He's promoting this work, he's involved in many projects, and that's always been the history of working with him.
He's a great collaborator, but he takes his time, so I have hope that he'll eventually get back to it.
Have you recently been redoing some of the humanoid material too, correct? Have you finished?
Is there a novel that's come out of that?
Yes, and you know I've called the humanoid touch that I finished all over a year ago,
and it will be published, I think, this summer in a limited-signed edition from Fantasia Press,
and with a whole round hard cover this November.
Part of that was serialized in analog, wasn't it?
The humanoid reprinted or printed...
The humanoid universe, I believe?
...in the middle of it under the title of the humanoid universe.
There was a reference in that story or somewhere to a book called Ten Trillion Wise Machines. What's that?
Well, that was my second title. At first I was going to call the novel a humanoid universe, and Fred didn't like that,
and I wanted to call it Ten Trillion Wise Machines, which is a title I like,
but people wanted the name humanoid in the title, and also that's pretty long to go on a book jacket.
J.K. Klein, a science fiction photographer, is a man who came up with the title of humanoid touch,
which I think was appropriate and brief, and has humanoids in it, and I'm very happy with it.
Perhaps you could explain the difference between humanoids and androids and robots.
Well, in my mind, the robots are a mechanical man, and the humanids are a type of robot.
That is, they're made out of plastic and steel and operated by remote control, by computers and so forth.
And androdes, because I used the term in the connetaires many years ago, and I think it's generally used as a meat machine.
A synthetic or artificial human being made out of flesh and blood, the sort of thing that is possible to produce these days
in the near future by genetic engineering, let's say.
That is, androids bleed in humanoid's grease.
It's interesting that you're going back and doing some of the material you started with,
well not started with, but what you've done before, you know, the legion material, humanoids and so forth.
Was it 1928 you published, you began publishing?
The first story was published in November, December 1928.
That's your amazing. And I've been a science fiction writer ever since.
That was in the tradition of merit, wasn't it more of a fantasy kind of?
Yes, pretty much at that time I was infatuated with merit.
I haven't read ready for many years lest the spell be gone.
But the first stories I wrote were full of these attempts at purple color illustrated with too many adjectives.
Later I began to try for more convincing settings and stronger characters and fewer adjectives.
Well, may I just start writing?
Well, I grew up on a sand hill farm in the south part of this county when times were pretty grim.
Well, I wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction or means to get a scientific education.
A few months after Grungeback started the Old Amazing, I came across some copies of it.
And I was immediately fascinated with experiments that worked with traveling time and spaceships to other worlds.
All sorts of wonderful things. It's been an important share of my life ever since.
Did you start for the money? Was it money and bone?
Well, the money was well almost in material.
I got $25 for that first story eventually.
And after a couple of years I earned enough writing science fiction so I didn't have to do anything else.
But half the secret was that I wasn't married and was willing to live economically.
So I certainly didn't do it for the money.
After two years in college I was offered a student assistantship in the chemistry lab.
I could have had a different career as a chemist probably when I was more fascinated with science fiction
than I was with solid science by that time.
Though I have tried to keep up as best a language can with what's going on in science.
Was the account true that I read in one place where you didn't know that your story had been accepted until you saw the magazine on the press?
That's true. I wrote these stories on an old Remington Biscuit model typewriter and a purple ribbon.
Two or three of them came back. One of them was with a misspelled write in the title.
And the metal man never did come back.
I was over at Canyon, Texas walking by near Stan one day and I saw my metal man on the cover of Amazing.
It was quite a thrill.
What was it like to write for the pulp say through the 30s and so forth?
Did you feel a part of something? Did you feel isolated out here?
There weren't many around here who could share your interest or was there?
The science fiction world has always been a sort of special community where I suppose we had our own special hand on science and the future and the shape of things to come.
I didn't see how the science fiction people very often read their stories and read letters in magazines and so forth.
In those days, before the paperbacks and before TV and before the comics, people read a lot more for entertainment than they do nowadays.
And there were really three sorts of magazines.
There were quality magazines like Hot Birds and the old Scribner's, and Light It for People with Brains and the Slicks, printed on coated paper that would take good advertising for people with money to spend.
The pulps for people who had neither brains nor money, but we had a lot of fun in the pulps even.
We were looked down upon widely and eventually by science fiction got recognized as being not entirely without brains, let's say.
And nowadays there's a little bit of money in it sometimes.
Back then it wasn't call science fiction, was it?
No, when I started, my first story was printed as science fiction.
Hugo Gernsback wrote science fiction together.
He invited the term science fiction in 2009, I think.
At that time you had to explain what it was.
I used to say it was the bunch of stories with the science background.
Well, wasn't Gernsback, didn't he want more scientifically oriented stories?
He preached gospel that science fiction was sugar coated science, that it was education.
And he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet the science and science wonder stories when he started that.
But actually I think that was as much from the middle to impress the readers as anything else because he did use true science in his stories when he could get it.
But he also printed a lot of stories that were pretty wild.
I think always in the magazine the adventure was more important than the science.
I've only seen a few copies of those very early pulps.
They say the amazing stories. That's a pretty big size.
Well, the size that time is nowadays.
Were there other sizes too or types?
Amazing was that size and wonder stories from Gernsback started that.
But they were also, and they were hardly regular pulps because in the beginning they were amazing.
It was filled up with reprints of classic science fiction and the rights were so low that professional writers didn't write for them.
So in the book, new stories, they were mostly written by amateurs such as myself.
But the pulp magazines were published in chains with, well, sometimes quite a different magazines.
There were mass economists there because they could print the covers all in the same press run and so forth.
And they had a standard smaller size.
A stounding came along from Clayton.
First is Stounding Stories of Super Science. It was the pulp size.
What was the average rate for stories in those days?
Well, Gernsback paid a half a cent a word or less, which meant we'd get $25 for a short story and $75 for a novelette.
But Clayton paid two cents a word and up, which is one reason maybe the Clayton magazines went bankrupt in the Great Depression.
But that meant that I could pound up 4,000 words a day for two days and earn 160 bucks, which was a fabulous feat for a farm kid in depression days.
That was a pretty good income back then.
It was. There was a lot of money.
Did you get much reader response? Did fans or readers ever...?
Well, of course, I didn't know many people in the locality who read science fiction.
But in those days, the backs of the magazines were filled up with letters and tiny types from readers.
That was the principle reader response.
I think the editors favored them because they didn't have to pay for the letters.
They were interesting to us.
I used to write them myself as well as reading.
It was the beginning of a fan, I suppose.
From what I can gather, reading back on your publishing history and so forth, through the 30s, late 20s, early 30s, you were mostly writing, I guess I would call it space opera, the legion material.
I've never objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful.
I even think that Star Wars could have been made out of my legion stories as well as it was from something else.
I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a lesson day dream.
Well, the pop readers were mostly young and as naive as I was.
The space opera was a symbolic escape from all sorts of things.
I notice, I'm not sure how I would phrase this, a change or a deepening or a more serious aspect to your fiction that begins in the late 30s.
Would I be right in saying that?
Probably. I was growing up and the readers were growing up.
That's something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American science fiction all along.
I think you can draw a distinction between, let's say, European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand, which has always been recognized and treated as literature and part of American science fiction, which was looked down on.
But as the readers of that grew older, some of them started writing, some of them started editing magazines, most of them outbrew science fiction, but some of them didn't.
So there was a continual increase in the education, the sophistication and so forth, the whole field.
Maybe you should call it a diversification because there's still a readership for Edgar Rassabura and Robert E. Howard and whatever.
There are also people who, as I said, former fans who are now academic fans who are teaching science fiction courses and writing scholarly articles on science fiction to meet the publisher Paris test and so forth.
So essentially the field is just diversified into all sorts of levels and areas and interests.
Did Campbell influence the way he wrote fiction at all? Don W. Campbell?
Yes, I think he influenced the way that everybody wrote science fiction because when he became editor of Amazing and later changed the, I mean, Astounding, later changed the name to Analogue, he had the best high-spay market in the field.
He was, well, let's say, science fiction was serious to him as a way of speculating about science and its impact in the future of mankind and so forth.
He was tremendously inventive.
He was full of ideas that he shared very freely and everybody who was writing science fiction for those years was influenced by Kamala, it seems to me,
whether directly or not, if they weren't trying to write for him and reading his letters, they were reading such writers as O. Heinlein and Dick Kemp and Sturgeon and the dozen others who were Kamala writers.
And some people resetted Kamala and felt that it was an effort to write for him.
Kamala and Heinlein used to complain that you couldn't sell him adult sex, but Kamala and I thought so much alike so that I always felt at home with his magazine and enjoyed working with him.
And he gave me occasional very useful suggestions that I used and he never did, well, I didn't have material, I had to try to persuade me to say anything I didn't want to say.
But I believe that personally he was optimistic about science in the future, but when I wrote such a pessimistic, dystopian thing as The Folded Hands, he published it as it was and asked for more.
He was going to ask you about that with folded hands. You sold that one to Campbell, that was sold to him?
And he suggested a sequel to it. He was fanatic for various things that look sort of correct, but nowadays including Joseph Ryan and parapsychology.
And he suggested that people's hands were folded, they would use their minds, they would develop parapsychological powers and perhaps defeat the humanoids.
I felt that the humanoids couldn't be defeated so that the ending of my novel was sort of ambiguous, but he published it as I said it to him and the reader seems like it's probably not.
I was interested in what you wrote in the afterward to one of the recent editions of The Humanoids, the way your interpretation of it's changed.
Like, didn't she used to see yourself, you said, as a romantic and the humanoids were bad, but then you'd altered that?
Well, I think so. That is, at one level, since the human knowledge of machines, the perfect machine, as originally stated, the theme, the perfect machine would be perfectly dreadful because it would take away all human freedom and responsibility and opportunity for achievement.
But as I came to look at the story of Maher, it seemed to me the essential human conflict in it is the conflict between the individual and society.
The people in the stories are in a complex and painful emotional situation because the humanoids are meant to be good. They're presented as benign, they're trying to assure the safety and happiness of mankind.
And in doing this they destroy freedom and I decided eventually this reflects my own very other childhood experience when people were overprotecting me because they loved me and my own good, but still I couldn't help a deeper sentiment because they wouldn't let me do some many things I wanted to do.
And I feel, by the way, that the conflict between the individual and society is the basic material of most literature, really, and I approach it in all sorts of ways.
And another level why it can be critical of the influence of society on the individual is, and Ibsen especially, he presents character after character, who's destroyed by the pressures of society or by conceiving too much to society.
In that novel, the humanoids of Iron Smith, it seemed to me, represented society or conformity and so forth. When I first read the book I kept thinking he was going to turn into an evil character of villain, but you never made him a villain.
He remained, I don't know, a friendly person, a helpful person, but simply one who was siding with the humanoids. Has your attitude toward him changed since you've written the book?
I don't think maybe I understand him better. When I was writing the novel I don't think I really understood him except that he was a fascinating enigma.
That is, he was a likable guy, he wasn't caught up in the conflict that my main character was. He got along with the humanoids and they befriended him.
And it occurred to me later that he's the example of the person who does conform to society, who accepts its limitations, and as a result of that, he's unable to live a more relaxed and richer life in contrast to the person always in conflict with society, who in the worst instance has to destroy himself because nobody can live alone.
If you were to continue with the humanoid, you know, further than you have the humanoid stories, would you ultimately have them, man, being happy under their care? Would they stop conquering the universe?
Well, I haven't planned to do that. In fact, I was reluctant to write any more about him until Fred Poll offered me a contract that I couldn't refuse.
But in this new novel, the humanoid touch, where I tried to work out an alternative that doesn't involve the destruction of the humanoids but does offer an alternate way of life that isn't escaped from.
I don't know how readers will react at the story. I enjoyed writing and I have hopes for it.
Well, you must have, when you finished the humanoids, it was with folded hands, say when you finished with folded hands in that time period, you must have gotten some response from readers or editors that it was kind of pessimistic or dystopian because you wrote the equalizer, didn't you, as sort of a counter?
Well, more or less, in fact, with folded hands, the humanoid stories were the first project that I undertook after I got home from World War II. I was an Air Force weather forecaster in the Southwest Pacific when the bomb went off and the atomic bomb cast a dark mushroom cloud over all science fiction.
And much science fiction was suddenly pessimistic about the future and this was the setting in which I wrote the humanoid.
And when I started to write it, I originally felt that they could be somehow conquered or disposed of or whatever.
Then as a work-film, I realized that logically and artistically, they were invincible.
So I gave up in the middle of a, before I got to the middle of a novel I planned and wrote the equalizer as an example of, let's say, that technology is benevolent.
It can be used to make a really better world. Then I came back with the humanoid and re-plotted it with folded hands.
I would just have one more question on the humanoid books, the humanoid material. I guess some of the readers, some responses I've read about it have been kind of confused or on both sides of the question as to what you meant.
My concern would be, are you optimistic about man and his future and his relation to machines? Can he control them? Can he survive them? Are they going to destroy him in his nature?
Well, I think I'm optimistic. I try to be optimistic. I think that once we have technology, we can't unhave it. We can't put the genie back in the bottle. We have to accept it and live with it.
I think that people who want to return to the 18th century or to the Garden of Eden or whatever are simply trying to whistle in the dark. And I think that technology can solve problems if we use it to solve problems.
So I'm more optimistic than stories. I think that to a considerable extent, a story should have its own independent theme, more or less independently of what the writer thinks or believes when I'm trying to write a story where I like to stop after I have a reasonable start and look at it and decide what the theme is and then rearrange it if necessary.
I think that's the best way to give it the strongest impact I can.
Do you have any questions in this area, David?
Not about the humanoids. I have one backing up a little bit. It seems that many of your stories have anticipated scientific discoveries such as Dark Star Station anticipated neutron stars. How did you get the ideas about that?
Well, it's hard to say except that I've always been fascinated with science. What you can put it as a sort of mystery story of what the world is, the universe is about its origins and development and meaning with effort going on in a hundred fields of science to unravel the mystery.
I've always tried to read science magazines and science books and keep up with what's happening. I'm concerned with what the universe is. Sometimes I have speculations of my own that will later confirm this.
I notice a number of stories and in some of your novels, especially in the late 30s or 40s where you describe totalitarian kind of societies like Breakdown.
Was that the story I think with the Square Deal, if I remember correctly?
In that area where the humans are struggling to overcome a sort of a totalitarian society, was that in any way related to the world situation?
I think so. At that time, of course, we were faced with Hitler a little bit later with Stalin. I think there were too many stories of that time that placed us in a struggle with a totalitarian situation.
And of course, that is the sort of ultimate statement of the problem of the society versus the individual, the individual being destroyed, at least his freedom erased by a totally arbitrary society.
If I'm remembering correctly that story Breakdown, that the one where Boss Kellan was in control and his son wanted to go to the stars, right? The research, the interest, and the boss had stayed on the earth, forget that.
I took that as very characteristic of your fiction that you have to have a goal, a challenge, you have to keep wanting to go rather than be structured and restricted in a society.
You know, kind of something to look forward to to try for.
I think we all need goals and promises and escapes and freedom and realization of possibility and so forth. It seems to me that where we're caught in this paradoxical situation between the needs of the individual and the demands of the society, and we can't live completely alone.
One week we have to have the support and not have one-to-four of the other people, but the society demands too much. It's destructive. So there's no final answer to it. It's a matter of precarious set of compromises that goes on as long as we live.
And some people make compromises more successful than others. I did my dissertation on H.G. Wells, I think was a very successful compromise with society, and lived a very rich and varied life, and ensured the love of many gifted women and so on and so forth, and contrasted with a friend of his named Gissie, George Gissie, my mid-hoof.
I think that's the first time I've ever seen a woman who, well, met society or tried to head on and died young and bitter and poor and defeated.
Yeah, didn't you sort of, if I remember one place you sort of care, you didn't say this, but I got the impression Gissie was the, say, the forester type in the humanoids, and Wells was more the iron smith type?
Well, that fits my own notions. I don't know if I ever said it.
Did you take Wells to be pessimistic or about man's future progress?
Well, I did my dissertation on Wells and tied on critical progress.
Critical progress?
Well, I think that our universe is not all we'd like it to be, that our universe is hostile or certainly not friendly to progress, and that we have a barrier in the animal nature of mankind, which he explores and presents things as the island of Dr. Morrow,
and then a further notion that progress limits itself, that is, as an evolutionary struggle, and I think that Wells was a Darwinian if you stop struggling and you sink back, so you never can reach an ultimate peak and stay there.
But on the other hand, Wells must have had hope for something about Earth because he spent most of his life in a struggle to build a better society, to educate us and warn us and shape us for a world of state, and he died, I think, more or less in bitter despair,
but still it seems to be that not most of his life was lived in hope.
I want to ask you a little bit too. It's fascinating to me the way science fiction caught on and began, you know, through the 30s and so forth.
And all around 1939, if I remember, people like Asimov and Heinlein, and I think it's pronounced Van Bo, is that correct?
Van Bo, okay. They started publishing around that time. Were you reading these people as they started?
They all started in Kamal's magazine, astounding. He was, well, I don't know whether you'd say Kamal discovered them or they discovered him, but it was, let's say, a small group with a great deal of well-fellowship or fellow understanding and so forth.
And it was an exciting period in which to be alive. In 1940, I spent about a year in Los Angeles when I spent many Saturday evenings up at Bob Hanlon's home on Laurel Canyon in Hollywood.
When we had what we called the Manana Literary Society, it was not an organization, it was just a group of friends, but we got together and talked science fiction.
And we were all reading each other science fiction, but it was published. The field was a lot closer knit than it is now because everybody could read all that anybody published.
It was a little group and we were much closer together, and by and large, we were friends.
Have you kept up personal, well, I guess as president, AFWA and so forth, or SWA?
SFWA, that's right.
Well, I still have a lot of old friendships and make new friends, but we have upwards of 500 members in the organization.
Nearly all of them have published at least a few stories.
And publishers, paperback publishers, some make probably 20 or 30 free books a month.
And most of these I don't have time to read. So I have old friends that I try to keep in touch with, keep up with, but it's impossible for anybody to be as intimately acquainted with all the field as we all were in the 30s and 40s.
But we still have a fellowship or sort of subculture that draws us together in a way that doesn't happen to leaders of the mystery or westerns or whatever.
And it seems to me that basically it's a concern with science and technology and impact on human beings and technology and the future that we have.
Not a realization that the world is changing and a concern about what the future is going to be like, that the layman or the mundane, as people call them, try to forget maybe,
because if they see change at all they're afraid of it.
Yeah, I read that when you were younger you were sort of anti-nuclear power and your position on that's changed over the years.
Well, I'm certainly pro-nuclear power now. I'm not sure that I was ever strongly against it except that when I heard that the atom had been split,
when I was sort of dismayed, I had known that it was possible I'd written fiction about it as early as 1930, but I saw that it was going to make life complicated and I wish that it hadn't happened in my time.
But now since we have nuclear power it seems to me it's the safest and most necessary development that I can see.
You talk about contrasting mind, coal and nuclear power.
When you mind coal you bring out a lot of uranium and thorium along with it.
When you burn it, you pollute the atmosphere with a lot more radiation than has ever escaped from a nuclear plant.
You kill people in the mines and on the railways and so on and so forth, so that nobody, to the best of my knowledge, has yet been killed in a commercial nuclear accident.
And when we were developing steam boat boats on the Mississippi where we blew up people every few days and nobody talked much about it.
So it seems to me we have a sort of exaggerated fear of nuclear hazards and an unwillingness to open our eyes and balance the realities.
We can produce and use nuclear energy nowadays and whatever else we do is going to be more expensive or more dangerous or delayed.
That is space power plants, solar power, whatever, all for glittering possibilities for the next century but they can't do much for us in the next 10 or 20 or 30 years.
I'll change the subject for just a minute. How did you start to collaborate with Frederick Paul?
Well, at that time Fred was my agent and I sent him material and he suggested things that could be done with it.
The first instance was something that I called the Conquest of the Abyss.
I started out to write a novel about an undersea world and I put in the bedsheet on the wall and made maps.
I did research, I described the technologies and invented people and culture and the setup.
When I got about halfway through what was meant to be the novel, it just died.
I used up all my creativity and planning.
When Fred came in, we got three undersea novels about it and our reefs of space came about more or less the same way.
Somewhat later, I'd written a 400 page draft of something called the Iron Collar Man that had the reefs of space and all the essential background in it.
I was happy with it. I never did do a final draft and I showed it to Fred while we repotted it and he rewrote it.
It was a very successful revision, speaking of anticipating science, where it took a long time to get that into print.
I was afraid that people wouldn't start doing organ transplants too soon, but we did read the heart transcratters at least by a few years.
You're speaking of the body bank in that one.
That was a lot of fun to do and I had the body bank in my version, but Fred came up with a lot of delightfully horrifying variations and possibilities of the body bank.
Had you run across that in fiction before?
To your knowledge, was that the first time people had done it?
Well, so far as I knew it was near the body bank, it was suddenly a new phrase to me.
I'm still curious. I've never understood how someone can collaborate on a novel. How does that work in your relationship?
First of all, a collaboration is a pretty intimate relationship, so like a marriage, it doesn't work unless you have a mutual trust.
Preferably both parties should have complementary abilities, so each one can have something.
I've collaborated with several people and always because I felt that they could do something I couldn't.
The first collaboration was with Dr. Miles J. Brewer.
Some 50 years ago we wrote a novel together as well as a short story and a novel that I just re-read.
In some ways I thought it was pretty good.
I kind of apprenticed myself to Brewer who was selling to Amazing a couple of years ahead of me.
When you look at him now, he wasn't a really brilliant writer, but he was competent and serious and took his techniques seriously.
He knew things that I wanted to learn. I did the writing and most of the writing and he helped with the plotting and suggested revisions and whatever.
With Fred, I respect him and first of all I like him and then I respect his style, his editorial sense and his craftsmanship generally.
When I'm working with someone like Fred, I think a writer needs an audience.
That is communication is a two-way process. You need to know your audience and you need feedback from your audience.
I'm doing a first drive for someone like Fred.
Since I know him, it gives an automatic focus. It helps crystallize the point of view.
It makes the writing go a lot faster, especially since I know that he's going to do the final drive.
I don't have to worry about literary polish, the alliterations or avoiding rhyming words, or whatever I write down what comes.
Trust him to redo it.
In other words, in your relationship with him, you sort of get the ideas in the first draft and he does the revision and polishing.
That was a trilogy. You mentioned the Reefs of Space. That was a trilogy, if I recall.
The third book was Rogue Star.
One of the ideas that fascinated me in that book, I think it was also in the second book, Star Child.
The concept of a sentient star and combining that with the intelligence with a human intelligence.
That was an idea that appealed to me tremendously.
I'm not sure where I got it. Sturgeon wrote a story long ago called Kill Dojo about a sentient thing that seized a world of Dojo.
My original motion for the story was to begin with the creation of a mind that could possess matter, could store intelligence, I think, and shifting electronic spin or whatever I had to technique.
I wanted to tell the story completely from the viewpoint of the creature that was made in the laboratory and enlarged itself successively until it became the mind of a star.
I did the first draft of the story that way, but Fred didn't like it, felt that it was successful.
He had me do some more material from the viewpoints of the human characters and the stories that published, had shifting points of view.
That's one collaboration that I've always a little bit regretted because I felt that the way I wanted to do it from the viewpoint of the alien could have been done and would have been something more original and difficult, or maybe harder to do.
But it worked out very well as a collaboration and evidently there was something less than successful about my first draft of Fred Buttenham Odie to change it.
Do you have any questions right now, Deire?
No, I'm fascinated so far.
Every once in a while I see portions of your stories, your novels that are being serialized in books like Galaxy or Amazing or Analog and so forth.
And there's one I've read partially, but I haven't found the rest of it. The one on Black Lantern and Snow Fire.
That was published as the power of blackness.
It was three or five novel that's put together, three of them right in the magazine, the Fight of Sin Science fiction.
And I guess one in Galaxy and one in Amazing.
One thing I saw, it seemed to me especially as a teacher of English, I guess, I look for symbolism in some places.
Is it Black Lantern seemed to me to represent say the third world, the oppressed, the Africans, the Latin Americans, a black man from the streets?
I think so. My original notion in the story was to write a thought, a sort of thought experiment to set up a story situation that would be attached to primitivism versus progress.
You know the theme of primitivism is something that we as teachers of literature, delight to discover William Faulkner or whatever.
And what I did in the story was to set up the planet Gunga, which was settled many thousand years ago by refugees from a wrecked spaceship who fell back into savagery on a hard world.
So they developed a very primitive society.
Meanwhile the galactic civilization continued to evolve so that Gunga's rediscovered why we have, let's say, an ultimately sophisticated technology in contrast with more or less ultimate primitivism.
And Black Lantern is a presented, is a member of the primitive society and conflict with the other society.
At that time I was still teaching school so I did the thing as a series of novelists so I just were getting it written and published.
And it probably lacks unity and I feel myself at the middle section of it's probably better than the two concluding sections.
Did you mean for one of the characters in that story, I think his name was Tool Smith, did you mean for him to be the same as Iron Smith because he does speak for the computer, the machine?
One more or less.
I wonder, especially the similarity of name and the way they thought.
But he started to start to represent it over there, technological culture.
Would snowfire have any, I guess I want to say symbolic value, although that's not quite the word.
Well, I'm only a romance, I love interest and she appealed to me as a sophisticated, civilized person in contact with a savage on his way up.
And I thought that there would be electricity between them.
The name probably is not too successful.
I thought it was sort of striking and appealing at the time, but people have sneered at it.
You didn't mean for black and snow, black lanterns, no fire to us?
Well, I don't know, that's part of it, but it's maybe too obvious.